
<div>
<small>
  Write Your First Compiler In C With Libchibi<br>
  <em>Part 1: Compiling Our First Program</em>
</small>
</div>
<h1 align=center>Chapter 04: Understanding Parsers</h1>

### Overview:

In the last chapter we starting writing our first actual code to take our plaintext and return a string of tokens. In the next chapter we will be writing our parser to turn that string of tokens into an AST. First, however, it is useful to take a short detour to understand exactly how parsers work before embarking on trying to build one.

If you remember our grammar from before, the key rule was that each symbol was defined in terms of direct substitution of other terminal and non-terminal symbols with one of the symbols ultimately representing our entire program. We discussed this in terms of starting with a program and choosing appropriate replacement rules for each of the non-terminals until we have a complete string composed of only terminals, individual characters or plaintext strings. When we are parsing, however, we aren't trying to construct a correct-looking program from scratch; instead, we already have a (presumably) correct program and we want to work out the semantic meaning of what it says. Since we designed our grammar with this in mind (remember our discussion of the grammar example in chapter 1 that didn't do this), we can rephrase this problem as taking our completed program and working out what grammar rules must have been used to construct it.

Some of you may remember that I made a point in chapter 2 of discussing ambiguity in a language. That being a property whereby multiple distinct applications of the grammar can produce the same output. This is exactly why, because if we are trying to find the grammar rules that must have been used to produce something then it is problematic if there are multiple different rules which could have done so. In fact, we even saw this in our tokeniser which already had to resolve one such ambiguity: between keywords and identifiers. The grammar of an identifier never explicitly prevented it from looking exactly like a keyword meaning once we have consumed the token, we had to compare it against a dictionary of keywords to determine if it was produced by the rule for generating identifiers, keywords, or even boolean literals. You can imagine that for a whole syntax these kinds of problems become a lot harder to untangle than just looking up against a dictionary. This is another advantage of using formal grammars: we can see the whole grammar, anticipate potential ambiguities and adapt to or adjust them rather than missing them working in the weeds of an actual implementation.

### The Lay Of The Land:

Since syntax is a much more complicated structure than the basic tokens of last chapter, and the ASTs we use to represent them more complex than a simple linear stream, we need an approach that can handle that. There are two major schools for this:
  *  The top-down approach
  *  The bottom-up approach

In the top-down approach we start from the fact that we know the entire thing is a program symbol and attempt to break it down into its constituent parts until we know exactly which terminals come from which rules. By contrast, in the bottom-up approach we start from the fact that we know the whole thing is composed of terminals and we try to find all the ways that those symbols could be put together to form more complex symbols and repeats until it finds a way to put them together that constructs a valid program.

In general the bottom-up approach tends to be more powerful in what it can evaluate and what it offers to resolve ambiguities. Indeed, the most common top-down approach (and what we will be writing), recursive descent, generally can't correctly parse mathematical expressions involving subtraction and division without introducing some specific fix. As you will see, this isn't a problem for our language since it won't represent mathematical expressions using the traditional 'infix' notation however just know that there absolutely are solutions to this problem (one of which is to parse expressions initially in a manner more similar to how we defined the grammar of expressions in chapter 2 then hand only those expression nodes to a dedicated expression parser that re-writes them correctly).

The cost of this power for bottom-up parsing approaches is complexity. In general it is not typically possible to write these kinds of parsers by hand and so tools like [Bison](https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/) and [YACC](https://silcnitc.github.io/yacc.html) are used to generate them. On top of this, they tend to run much more slowly than top-down parsers.

As you can imagine the tradeoffs of top-down are very much the opposite: simplicity and speed. That is exactly what we will be writing for this book. This allows us to write a parse ourselves that is specifically tailored to our language, move quickly, and have decently fast compile times as well as (eventually) much better error messages than are typically possible with the bottom up approach.

Specifically, we will be writing a _recursive descent_ parser. This is the most straightforward, and most mainstream, form of top-down parser. There are others, notably [packrat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Packrat_parser) parsers which are a highly modified variant of recursive descent that handle syntactic ambiguities better by modifying the kind of grammars they accept to no longer be context-free and [combinator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parser_combinator) parsers which take advantage of functional programming to make parsers that are more easily extended and improve certain safety elements (at the cost that you have to use functional programming which can be amazing for parsers but are often much less so when you want to actually **do** something with your AST afterwards).

Before we get into explaining recursive descent parsers and the outline of what we will be writing next chapter it is worth mentioning as well that there are a whole class of parsers that specialise in parsing, specifically, expressions using 'infix' notation. This means things like the operator '+' in traditional mathematical expressions where the arguments are either side rather than immediately afterwards like in, say, function arguments. These can be parsed top-down but they typically have some unique challenges relating to BIDMAS-style rules that make it somewhat trickier so people have developed parsing techniques such as [Pratt Parsing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operator-precedence_parser#Pratt_parsing) and the [Shunting Yard Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shunting_yard_algorithm) to handle these specifically. Since our language doesn't make use of these we won't cover them in any more detail. I do, however, highly encourage you to go and learn about them yourself independently if you're interested in making a language that does use infix notation, doubly so if you want to let the programmer in your language define their own operators.

### Recursive Descent:

So, now for the meat and potatoes: how recursive descent parsers actually work. In our tokeniser from chapter 3 we accepted the string of terminals (in that case, chars) as an argument to a single function and stored the index in a function-local variable. For recursive-descent parsers we use a separate function to parse each AST node so we instead store the string of terminals (in this case our token Seq) as well as the index into it as global variables within our module. While we could pass them around as arguments it is simpler to keep them in global state since each parser consumes the tokens for that symbol meaning it would have to return _both_ the index and the AST node it has parsed then that index would have to get passed around to the next function, increasing complexity.

In theory, recursive descent is very simple: we know we are starting with a program so we consume any terminals, then call the functions to consume non-terminals (holding onto their result so we can place it in our program as needed) and keep going until every function we call is defined. The difficulty comes when there are multiple replacement rules (including situations that _would_ require multiple replacement rules in plain BNF such as the '+' and '*' suffixes). For that we have to do some sort of, either looking ahead by trying things and seeing if they fail/succeed then walking back (we will be doing some of this) or analysis of the current token to see if we have reached a particular marker (we will also be doing this). Luckily, for us, both of these approaches will be made particularly easy in ChibiLisp (although not so easy that we won't still have to develop the kinds of techniques and strategies you would find necessary in any other language you might want to parse).

### Conclusion:

Now that we understand how parsers work, and what kind of parser we will be writing for ChibiLisp, without further ado, let us move on to actually using that knowledge to write our parser. Next chapter that is exactly what we'll do.

